#
#  Intel(R) Enclosure LED Utilities
#  Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Intel Corporation.
#
#  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
#  under the terms and conditions of the GNU General Public License,
#  version 2, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
#
#  This program is distributed in the hope it will be useful, but WITHOUT
#  ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
#  FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
#  more details.
#
#  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
#  this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
#  51 Franklin St - Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
#
=head1 NAME

ledctl - Intel(R) LED control application for a storage enclosures.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ledctl> [I<MODE>] [I<OPTIONS>] ...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The ledctl is an user-space application designed to control LEDs associated with each
slot in an enclosure or a drive bay. Root privileges are required for its operation.


The ledctl application facilitates LED management for SAS/SATA and PCIe storage devices.

=head4 Supported protocols/methods for LED management are:

=over

=item

B<SES-2 and SMP> for SAS devices,

=item

B<LED messages over SGPIO> for SATA,

=item

B<VMD and NPEM> for PCIe.

=back

B<SAF-TE> protocol is not supported.

For SAS/SATA storages supporting controllers may transmit LED management
information to the backplane controllers via the SGPIO interface. The SGPIO
bus carries bit patterns, which translate into LED blink patterns in
accordance with the International Blinking Pattern Interpretation (IBPI)
of SFF-8489 specification for SGPIO.
Please note some enclosures do not stick close to the SFF-8489
specification. It might happen that the enclosure processor will accept
the IBPI pattern but it will blink LEDs not according to SFF-8489
specification or it has a limited number of patterns supported.

The ledctl application has been verified to work with Intel(R) storage
controllers (i.e. Intel(R) AHCI controller and Intel(R) SAS controller).
The application might work with storage controllers of other vendors
(especially SCSI/SAS controllers). However, storage controllers of other
vendors have not been tested.

The ledmon application has the highest priority when accessing LEDs.
It means that some patterns set by ledctl may have no effect if ledmon is running
(except Locate pattern).

The ledctl application is a part of Intel(R) Enclosure LED Utilities.

=head4 The ledctl utilizes the following documents as references:

=over

=item

SGPIO (Serial GPIO) - SFF-8485

=item

IBPI (International Blinking Pattern Interpretation) - SFF-8489

=item

LED Enclosure management messages - AHCI specification rev 1.3,
section 12.2.1.

=item

SAS (Serial Attached SCSI) - T10/1760-D

=item

SES-2 (SCSI Enclosure Services-2) - T10/1559-D

=item

SMP (Serial Management Protocol) - T10/1760-D

=item

NPEM (Native PCIe Enclosure Management) - PCIe base specification rev 4.0

=item

VMD (Intel(R) Volume Management Device) - Intel(R) VROC (VMD NVMe RAID) Quick

Configuration Guide rev 1.2

=back

=head2 Pattern Names

The ledctl application accepts the following names for I<pattern_name> argument
according to SFF-8489 specification.

=over 8

=item B<locate>

Turns Locate LED associated with the given device(s) on.

=item B<locate_off>

Turns only Locate LED off.

=item B<locate_and_failure>

Turns Locate LED and Failure LED on.

=item B<normal>

Turns Status LED, Failure LED and Locate LED off.

=item B<off>

Turns only Status LED and Failure LED off.

=item B<ica> or B<degraded>

Visualizes "In a Critical Array" pattern.

=item B<rebuild>

Visualizes "Rebuild" pattern.

=item B<ifa> or B<failed_array>

Visualizes "In a Failed Array" pattern.

=item B<hotspare>

Visualizes "Hotspare" pattern.

=item B<pfa>

Visualizes "Predicted Failure Analysis" pattern.

=item B<failure> or B<disk_failed>

Visualizes "Failure" pattern.

=item B<ses_abort>

SES-2 R/R ABORD

=item B<ses_rebuild>

SES-2 REBUILD/REMAP

=item B<ses_ifa>

SES-2 IN FAILED ARRAY

=item B<ses_ica>

SES-2 IN CRIT ARRAY

=item B<ses_cons_check>

SES-2 CONS CHECK

=item B<ses_hotspare>

SES-2 HOT SPARE

=item B<ses_rsvd_dev>

SES-2 RSVD DEVICE

=item B<ses_ok>

SES-2 OK

=item B<ses_ident>

SES-2 IDENT

=item B<ses_rm>

SES-2 REMOVE

=item B<ses_insert>

SES-2 INSERT

=item B<ses_missing>

SES-2 MISSING

=item B<ses_dnr>

SES-2 DO NOT REMOVE

=item B<ses_active>

SES-2 ACTIVE

=item B<ses_enable_bb>

SES-2 ENABLE BYP B

=item B<ses_enable_ba>

SES-2 ENABLE BYP A

=item B<ses_devoff>

SES-2 DEVICE OFF

=item B<ses_fault>

SES-2 FAULT

=item B<ses_prdfail>

SES-2 PRDFAIL

=back

=head2 Patterns Translation

When non SES-2 pattern is send to device in enclosure automatic
translation is being done.

=over 8

=item B<locate>

I<locate> is translated to I<ses_ident>

=item B<locate_off>

I<locate_off> is translated to I<~ses_ident>

=item B<normal> or B<off>

I<normal> or I<off> is translated to I<ses_ok>

=item B<ica> or B<degraded>

I<ica> or I<degraded> is translated to I<ses_ica>

=item B<rebuild>

I<rebuild> is translated to I<ses_rebuild>

=item B<ifa> or B<failed_array>

I<ifa> or I<failed_array> is translated to I<ses_ifa>

=item B<hotspare>

I<hotspare> is translated to I<ses_hotspare>

=item B<pfa>

I<pfa> is translated to I<ses_prdfail>

=item B<failure> or B<disk_failed>

I<failure> or I<disk_failed> is translated to I<ses_fault>

=back

=head1 MODES AND MODE SPECIFIC OPTIONS

This chapter outlines the modes and options applicable to specific modes. If no mode is
specified, it defaults to IBPI mode.

=head2 B<-I> or B<--ibpi>

Sets pattern on given devices. Allows ledctl to determine the best controller automatically. Must be
followed by IBPI option. By default, it checks all devices and may update states on different
drives than requested if state change is determined (generally it happens for devices in raid
array).

=over 4

=item B<PATTERN={ device1 device2 }> or B<PATTERN=device1,device2>

The IBPI option accepts device lists in two formats: comma-separated elements and elements
enclosed in curly braces with spaces between them. Refer to "Pattern names" for supported states.
For usage examples, see "EXAMPLES".

=item B<-x> or B<--listed-only>

Suppresses default behavior, changes state only on devices listed in CLI. It is optional.

=back

=head2 B<-L> or B<--list-controllers>

Prints information (system path and type) of all controllers detected.

=head2 B<-P> or B<--list-slots>

Prints all slots for the controller type. Must be followed by B<--controller-type>.

=head2 B<-G> or B<--get-slot>

Displays specific slot details. Must be followed by B<--controller-type> and slot identifier
B<--device> or B<--slot>. B<--print> can be used to control output.

=over 4

=item B<-r I<print>> or B<--print>=I<print>

Optional parameter for B<--get-slot>. It is utilized to retrieve a specific property
from the output. Supported values include: slot, device, and state.

=back

=head2 B<-S> or B<--set-slot>

Changes led state for slot. Must be followed by B<--controller-type>, slot identifier B<--device>
or B<--slot> and B<--state>.

=over 4

=item B<-p I<state>> or B<--state=I<state>>

It is mandatory for B<--set-slot>. It provides state to be set for the slot. Refer to
"Pattern names" for supported states list.

=back

=head2 SLOT MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

This section describes options necessary by various slot management modes.

=over 4

=item B<-n I<controller_type>> or B<--controller-type=I<controller_type>>

Controller type chosen for the request. It agregates multiple controllers of the same
type. Supported types are: VMD, NPEM and SCSI.

=item B<-d I<device>> or B<--device=I<device>>

Block device node for device attached to the slot. It can be used instead of B<--slot>.

=item B<-p I<slot>> or B<--slot=I<slot>>

Unique slot identifier. It can be used instead of B<--device>. Use B<--list-slots> to determine slot
identifiers. Slot definition depends on the controller and is unique across all controllers of the
same type. The slot identifier is always available, even if a device is not connected.

=back

=head1 GENERAL OPTIONS

This section describes options available for every mode.

=over 4

=item B<-l I<path>> or B<--log>=I<path>

Sets a path to log file. If this option is not specified then default log file
F</var/log/ledctl.log> is used.

=item B<-h> or B<--help>

Prints help text out. Use B<--MODE --help> to get help for requested mode or B<--help> to
get general help.

=item B<-v> or B<--version>

Displays version of ledctl and information about the license.

=item B<--log_level=I<log_level>>

Set the application's logging level. Available levels, listed from most verbose to least verbose,
include: ALL, DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, and QUIET. The default setting is WARNING.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</var/log/ledctl.log>

Global log file, used by all instances of ledctl application. To force logging
to user defined file use I<-l> option switch.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate> on a single block device. Note that
all remaining LEDs, might be changed.

C<ledctl --ibpi locate=/dev/sda>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate_off> on a single block device.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only locate_off=/dev/sda>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<off> on the given devices. It uses second
format of device list.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only off={ /dev/sda /dev/sdb }>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate> and I<rebuild> on different devices
at the same time. It uses the second format of device list.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only locate={ /dev/sdb } rebuild={ /sys/block/sdc }>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to I<locate> on three block devices. It uses the first
format of device list.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only locate=/dev/sda,/dev/sdb,/dev/sdc>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate> and I<rebuild> on different devices
at the same time. It uses the first format of device list.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only locate=/dev/sdb rebuild=/sys/block/sdc>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate> and I<rebuild> on different devices
at the same time. It uses the both formats of device list.

C<ledctl --ibpi --listed-only locate={ /dev/sdb } rebuild=/sys/block/sdc>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to get all detected controllers.

C<ledctl --list-controllers>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to get all slots for controller type I<NPEM>.

C<ledctl --list-slots --controller-type=npem>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to get particular slot with I<device> specified, for
controller type I<SCSI>. Print I<state> only.

C<ledctl --get-slot --controller-type=scsi --device=/dev/sda --print=state>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to get particular slot with I<slot> specified, for
controller type I<NPEM>. Print I<device> only.

C<ledctl --get-slot --controller-type=npem --slot=10000:02:04.0 --print=device>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<locate> for slot with I<device> specified,
for controller type I<VMD>.

C<ledctl --set-slot --controller-type=vmd --device=/dev/nvme0n1 --state=locate>

=head2 The following example illustrates how to set I<failure> for slot with I<slot> specified
for controller type I<VMD>.

C<ledctl --set-slot --controller-type=vmd --slot=1 --state=failure>

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2009-2024 Intel Corporation.

This program is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation.

=head1 SEE ALSO

ledmon(8), ledmon.conf(5)

=head1 AUTHOR

This manual page was written by Artur Wojcik <artur.wojcik@intel.com>. It may
be used by others.
