#
#  Intel(R) Enclosure LED Utilities
#  Copyright (C) 2009-2024 Intel Corporation.
#
#  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
#  under the terms and conditions of the GNU General Public License,
#  version 2, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
#
#  This program is distributed in the hope it will be useful, but WITHOUT
#  ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
#  FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
#  more details.
#
#  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
#  this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
#  51 Franklin St - Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
#
=head1 NAME

ledmon.conf - Configuration file for Intel(R) Enclosure LED Utilities.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The ledmon configuration file allows you to use advanced settings and functions
of Intel(R) Enclosure LED Utilities. The global location of the configuration
file is F</etc/ledmon.conf>. Instead of a global configuration file, you can
specify a local config file using the I<-c> option when running ledmon.

=head2 SYNTAX

One line should keep exactly one option and value in the configuration file in
format: OPTION=VALUE. Any word that begins with a hash sign (B<#>) starts a
comment and that word together with the remainder of the line is ignored. Empty
lines are allowed. Either single quotes (B<'>) or double quotes (B<">) should
not be used.

Values are considered as truth: enabled, true, yes, 1.

Values are considered as false: disabled, false, no, 0.

See also the examples section.

=head2 List of configurable options:

B<EXCLUDELIST> - Ledmon will exclude scanning controllers listed on excludelist.
When allowlist is also set in config file, the excludelist will be ignored.
The controllers should be separated by comma (B<,>) character. Only exact paths
to the controller (e.g. /sys/devices/pci0000:c9/0000:c9:00.5) will be respected.
The B<XBD Extended Regular Expressions> are supported.  The deprecated name of
B<BLACKLIST> is supported for backwards compatibility.  It will be
removed in a future release.

B<BLINK_ON_INIT> - Related with RAID Initialization (resync), Verify (check)
and Verify and Fix (repair) processes. If value is set to true - status LEDs of
all member drives will blink with proper pattern if RAID volume is under sync
process. If value is set to false, processes like init or verifications will not
be reported by LEDs. The default value is true.

B<BLINK_ON_MIGR> - RAID can be migrated between some levels or strip sizes and
the flag is related with this processes. Also RAID Grow operation will be
reported along with this flag. If value is set to true - status LEDs of all
member drives will blink with proper pattern if RAID volume is under reshape.
If value is set to false, listed actions will not be reported by LEDs. The
default value is true.

B<INTERVAL> - The value is given in seconds. Defines time interval between
ledmon sysfs scan. The minimum is 5 seconds the maximum is not specified. The
default value is 10 seconds.

B<LOG_LEVEL> - Corresponds with I<--log-level> flag from ledmon. Log level QUIET
means no logging at all and ALL means to log everything. The default log level
is WARNING. Acceptable values are: quiet, error, warning, info, debug, all.
Value also can be set by integer number - 0 means 'quiet' and 5 means 'all'.

B<LOG_PATH> - Sets a path to local log file. If this option is specified the
global log file F</var/log/ledmon.log> is not used.

B<RAID_MEMBERS_ONLY> - If flag is set to true ledmon will limit monitoring only
to drives that are RAID members. The default value is false.

B<REBUILD_BLINK_ON_ALL> - Flag is related with RAID rebuild process. When value
is set to false - only the drive that the RAID is rebuilding to will be marked
with appropriate LED pattern. If value is set to true all drives from RAID
that is during rebuild will blink during this operation.

B<ALLOWLIST> - Ledmon will limit changing LED state to controllers listed on
allowlist. If any allowlist is set, only devices from list will be scanned by
ledmon. The controllers should be separated by comma (B<,>) character. Only
exact paths to the controller (e.g. /sys/devices/pci0000:c9/0000:c9:00.5)
will be respected.
The B<XBD Extended Regular Expressions> are supported.  The deprecated name of
B<WHITELIST> is supported for backwards compatibility.  It will be
removed in a future release.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Excluding one controller from ledmon scans, changing log level and scans
interval:

LOG_LEVEL=all

INTERVAL=5

#Exclude disks from SATA controller

EXCLUDELIST=/sys/devices/pci0000:00/0000:00:17.0

=head2 Blink only on RAID members, blink on all disks during rebuild and ignore
init phase:

RAID_MEMBERS_ONLY=true

BLINK_ON_INIT=false

REBUILD_BLINK_ON_ALL=true


=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2009-2017 Intel Corporation.

This program is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation. See the built-in help for details
on the License and the lack of warranty.

=head1 SEE ALSO

ledmon(8), ledctl(8)

=head1 AUTHOR

This manual page was written by Michal Zylowski <michal.zylowski@intel.com>. It
may be used by others.
